All right.
There we go.
Sure.
And we'll just, um, pop back on to public session.
So welcome back, everyone, uh, for our second half of, of the
session. Uh, just looking to our structured agenda, we are back on
environmental reporting and outcomes, and so we will start with
a question from Grant Cullen.
Right. Yeah, just the biodiversity on private land and so forth.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you.
There you go, right. Um, uh, speaking as a farmer and with, with a
number of, um, blocks of bush on our property, and
the... obviously the QE II Trust does, uh, a lot of work in this space.
I think they've got about 200,000 hectares under covenant at the
moment, which is, I think, the second-largest equivalent to a national park in the
country.
Mm-hmm.
What, what... r- how... when you, um, assess the
biodiversity, how do, how do you see that, um...
the m- the, uh, uh, contribution of that, um, and, and the, and the level of
protection that that's provided?
In the last year, we've undertaken work around, uh, nature credit
markets, and we have ten pilots around New Zealand at the moment
on different, uh, la- property types that are looking
at, uh, how, uh, it may be
possible to, uh, monetize or provide incentives
around biodiversity protection on, uh, on private
land, um, uh, or, uh, biodiversity enhancement.
So, um, that, that work is intended to inform future
decision-making around the role of government in, uh, promoting,
uh, nature markets, natural repair markets in particular.
Um, and the reform of the resource management system will present some
opportunity to support that too, and there'll be further detail, uh, of that
announced, uh, in the reform package to government
Good.
Mm-hmm.
There's a supple. Okay, Lan, what's up?
So why the ten pilots?
What... like, are they other people's pilots that are sort of under one umbrella,
or are they-
Y-
... your pilots?
No. So, um, the, uh, the starting position is that,
uh, there is a really, uh, some activity occurring
where, um, uh, landowners, private landowners are being
funded by third parties to undertake, uh, activity on their
land. Um, a, uh, member pr- previous
referred to, uh, the QE II Trust. There's a range of others, uh, that are
investing in, in that activity. So the government doesn't wanna come in
and crowd that out or necessarily create a single market
in the way that we have with the Emissions Trading Scheme for nature credits,
reflecting that there's the opportunity for innovation, and there will be a range
of different ways in which people will want to, uh, enter into those
arrangements. So the point of the pilots is to explore
different types of arrangements between private landowners and
investors, uh, and, uh, learn from each of those.
So, um, the arrangement we have with each of those, which are existing
projects-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, is that in exchange for some funding support from the ministry, um, we get
a- access to the learnings from, uh, from their, um, their, their pilot
projects.
Okay.
Thank you. Uh, we'll now move to Priyanka.
Um, mine could actually well be a sup on this.
Um, so- so are you then saying that the
different pilots that you have looking at the
options of arrangements or other options, um,
like QE2 covenants but not necessarily that, uh, will then
feed into the advice on the RM reform work?
Is that
what you're saying?
So the... It's feeding into ad- advice separately around the role of
government in, uh, nature repair markets.
Um, what I'm saying is that in addition to that-
Mm-hmm.
...resource management reforms will, uh, create the opportunity
for mechanisms around, uh, biodiversity, uh,
to be, um, uh- uh, funded on private,
uh, land-
Okay.
...either by local government or potentially as part of offsetting.
Right.
But that's all detail to-
Sure.
...to cover.
So the first part of that then in terms of the other package
of options, are there... Is there any information
that you can share with the committee on what some other options could
be other than QE2 covenants?
Do you want to take that, Anne?
Sure. I might just take us back a- a few steps.
Um, uh, morien everybody. My name's Anne Hider.
Uh, so the origins of the voluntary nature credit markets work
actually began in the previous administration, uh, where we consulted
on, uh, the proposal for a biodiversity credits market.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and that work was subsequently picked up by,
uh, the new Associate Minister for the Environment, uh, Andrew
Hoggard. Uh, in June of,
uh, this year, we announced a- a number of potential
roles that the government could take in helping to
enable a voluntary market to
scale. Now, the four roles that we outlined
firstly were, uh, direction setting.
So we heard very strongly from the market that h- the government being
clear on what role it would play or could play in the
market needs to be spelled out. It can't just be implicit.
So we had to be quite explicit about this is the role we think the government
could take. Uh, the second was how could government
support, uh, potentially through standard setting,
um, the estab- or the establishment of integrity
principles? Good projects is probably a simple way of thinking about
it. So how do you ensure that the projects happening around New Zealand that might
be part of a voluntary market-
Mm-hmm.
...are good projects? And we can do that through integrity principles.
Uh, thirdly, um, how can we help
ensure that, uh, investors can trust that the
environmental gains that are being articulated by project
proponents are real? So an assurance type
process. Uh, and then fourthly and finally, promoting
transparency, uh, for integrity and accountability.
You could do that, for example, through a national registry, uh, similar to what we
have, uh, for the ETS. So fundamentally, what we are
asking, uh, market actors and other interested parties to tell us
is what role could government take to help enable the market to scale?
Mm-hmm.
And at a practical level, uh, we tested that through a range of
pilots. We are testing it through a range of pilots.
Uh, there are some in Northland, uh, there's an ewe restoration initiative
up there, through to a wetlands initiative in Southland, across a
wide range of different stakeholder groups including Silver Fern Farms.
Uh, and it's really trying to get our head around the role that government can play
as an enabler.
Mm-hmm.
So we don't want to crowd out private market activity.
Uh, we also want to understand, yeah, where we can add the most
value, uh, and also provide, um,
opportunities for a wide range of projects, smaller
projects, uh, through to a- a range of diverse
participants. So, uh, offshore, uh, and similar type
voluntary markets for carbon, it's often the large
scale, um, cashed up type projects that are able to access this
market. And, um, Minister Hoggard who has been leading this work has been
very interested in how to ensure that you get a range of
different size of projects. So it might be a few hectares on
a- a farmer's block that is retired.
Uh, how might, uh, a property owner like that be able to benefit
from this type of regime?
Yeah.
Cool. Thanks. Just have a sup on-
...um, the... Staying on the topic of
biodiversity but slightly different from the private
land, um, stuff. I'm just interested, I see
that MfE is doing some work around ecosystem
typology.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and, uh, um, from- from what I understand, it's
around consistency of sort of language, how do we define that and
so on. Just interested to get a bit more information about that particular
project and also how it intersects, if it does,
with, um, the bio-invest tool that DOC has
been working on as well.
Mm-hmm. Do you want to pick this up?
Yeah.
Um, thank you for your question. Uh, just
recognizing and- and connecting this to our earlier session and the importance of
our role in ensuring that standards are- are
upheld and are reliable and consistent.
And so ensuring that there is a- a typology and- and
consistency of- of classification and approach is a really fundamental role
that we need to play across different domains and biodiversity is one of those.
And so, um, the piece of work that you have referred to is helping us with
that.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, it's also an important part of our evidence base in consideration
of the role of environmental limits in the new system as well.
Uh, and we work closely with- uh, with DOC, uh, on those.
It's, uh, there is, uh, staff from- from DOC working in partnership with
us.
Right. Okay.
Good. And Grant had a supplementary on that.
Yeah. Uh, just, um, once again the biodiversity space but once again slightly
different tangent. The- when the topic of significant nat-
nat- national natural areas come up, that really, that creates a
lot of-... um, challenge in the, in the, in the, for, for property
owners, um, across the country. It certainly gets a lot of emotions
going. Do you think the, with the sort of work that's going on with what
we, we, like I mentioned with QE2 and the, and the biodiversity credits, that we
can (clears throat) reach potentially a, a space
where, where you d- the, the State doesn't have to come and say, "Well, you have to
lock that piece up," or, "You have to control that bit of land like
this, run it like this"? 'Cause that, that certainly creates a lot of tension with
both iwi and, um, and -
(coughs)
... private land.
Uh, so I, I, I think we're working at, um, both ends of the
spectrum in terms of, um, supporting voluntary action-
Yeah.
... uh, in the ways that Anne described, but also, uh, obviously
the, the regulatory framework for, uh, biodiversity, uh,
on private land.
Mm-hmm.
Um, the minister, uh, Associate Minister responsible, uh, Minister
Hoggard, uh, did choose to pause, uh, earlier in the
government's term the roll-out of further, um, significant natural areas.
And, uh, all of, um, the, the future arrangements
around the, uh, regulation for biodiversity on private land has been
carried through the resource management reform work, and, uh,
there'll be more detail on that announced next week.
Okay. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. And a-another supplementary, Rachel?
Oh, no, Wenze-
Is it primary?
Yeah.
Just a quick sup?
Oh, okay, quick sup.
Uh, just on the
pilots, excuse me, um, when would we expect to
hear, like, what the outcome is?
So, uh, the next step, uh, in the work is to provide
advice to Cabinet in March. Uh, and
we developed a methodology that we are applying across the 10
projects, which by the way, I, I omitted to mention, include
QE2. Uh, and
that will inform our advice around, uh, what role the government could
take and over what sort of time horizon.
Thank you.
And Rachel.
Yeah, thank you. Uh, just, so, generally speaking, not, not on
this biodiversity topic, but for all your reporting and
monitoring, where, what are you doing for Matauranga Maori
in this space? You're the one I'm looking at.
Thank you for the question. Uh, and, and just recognizing the, the role
of, uh, that we have in relation to environmental reporting
is about putting information into the hands of decision-makers, and it's really
important that we draw on a range of sources of information.
When we use the term evidence, we, uh, include
Matauranga Maori as a, as a knowledge source of r- relevance in the
consideration of evidence, just as there are other
place-based, uh, information sources that are important, uh,
to be considered. Uh, and so, uh, as you can see
through our environmental reporting series, uh, we often, where
are, um, where there is information, uh, that is
relevant to be brought up at a national scale, we do what we can.
More often than not when it comes to Matauranga Maori, it's most relevant at
a place-based scale. And so-
Mm-hmm.
... often you see that reflected through the case studies that we produce
alongside our environmental reports, which give a, a richer, more
localized, um, story of, of what we see in terms of the
State pressure and impact. So-
Can, can you just give some examples of, of where something is
useful, uh, is used in a local place-based
scale, and then when you might
think that something's relevant nationally?
Yeah. So, um, you can see examples of,
um, the application of Matauranga Maori in a number of our
different reports, uh, uh, through our Environment,
uh, 2025.
Can you tell us about one you choose?
Yeah. Um, so the, the, um, role of mahinga kai-
Mm-hmm.
... and understanding of mahinga kai in, in an ecosystem as, as a food
source and, uh, and what that can tell us about what we understand of
how the environment is changing, uh, and how it's responding to changes
around it. So, um, that, uh, knowledge and information
is important to, uh, contribute to, uh, the broader
information source, uh, that helps inform decision-making.
Thank you.
Thank you. I might just jump in and ask a question here, 'cause I'm quite
interested in the biodiversity on private land.
And I was just wondering, um, with the catchment groups, um, does the
Ministry for Environment have...
I know it's more MPI, but obviously, um, you know, these are
great groups across the country that, uh, you know, volunteering
time to, uh, protect the waterways, uh, across the
private land that we see across New Zealand.
And, you know, farmers are doing an amazing job.
Um, d- like, what's, wha- how does the Ministry for Environment feed into
that? Because you most probably...
It's, it's, it's a good source to try and power up to, to help protect our
waterways.
Pass to Anne for it.
(clears throat) Uh, alongside, uh,
MPI, um, the Ministry for the Environment has been funding catchment
groups, uh, for a number of years, principally, uh, th- recently through
Jobs for Nature, through the Freshwater Improvement Fund.
Uh, it is certainly an area that we, um, uh, would be
supportive of continuing, uh, to fund.
It's something we are contemplating as part of the implementation of freshwater
farm plans.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, we see catchment groups as, uh, being an, an
incredible partner. Uh, they unlock a number of, uh,
channels and bring tools and skills and capabilities-
Mm-hmm.
... that are fundamentally important to achieving the environmental outcomes that
we're seeking. So, um, absolutely on board with what you're saying.
And do you see the catchment groups, uh, getting
better and stronger and, and, and seeing better outcomes?
There's a wide variety ac- across, uh, the country but yes, in
answer to your question. Uh, they are structured and formed in different
ways. So one thing we've been looking at, uh, with
MPI is, uh, potential different models for how
we might have a nationally consistent approach, uh, to how we fund.
That doesn't mean everyone has to be structured the same, but, uh,
we, uh, as-
Sorry to go a step back. As part of the model for delivering Jobs for Nature, it
involved multiple agencies. So you had DOC, LINZ, MFE,
MPI, um, uh, all with slightly different
variations of their approach to catchment group funding-
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and one of the lessons we took from, uh, the evaluation report at
the end of Jobs for Nature, uh, was the importance of having a national,
uh, nationally consistent standard in metrics, uh, across these sorts
of things. So we can roll up the data and really know whether the
approach in,
for a catchment group in Southland, um, is comparable to perhaps
other (audio cuts out) .
Mm-hmm. So just one last question on this.
Uh, so do you see real value in that kind of
private-public partnership essentially across the catchment groups
across New Zealand in terms of the outcomes?
It's... Yes.
It's an- It's actually fundamental to how we think about our work in
partnering generally-
Mm-hmm.
... at the Ministry for the Environment.
You know, we are acutely aware, uh, that we are only part of the broader
system, uh, that we are not operating generally at the front
line of delivery. Uh, so we work very closely with partners, whether that's,
uh, local government or catchment groups or EPA or
others. Uh, we know that in order to be successful, we need to partner
effectively.
Yeah, thank you. And Rachel's got a supplement.
Yeah. A couple of sups. Um, one is just to confirm
the funding that we were just talking about, that a lot of the catchment groups
were funded by Jobs for Nature.
Mm-hmm.
And that funding's gone. And so now you're looking at whether there's
gonna be future government investment in catchment groups.
Yep.
But just to- just to clarify though, there has been a- a substantial investment in
the catchment groups across the country was my understanding.
To date, Jobs for Nature funding or the program
officially ended, uh, 30 June. Uh, there are still some
projects that are continuing on, uh, but the funding and the program
ended then. Um, we... Ministers are
aware that there, uh, is
somewhat of
a gap, I suppose you could call it, that needs to be addressed and there are
conversations underway to look at that.
No decisions have been taken yet-
(clears throat)
Uh, but we are looking at whether, um, a potential part of that solution and
approach could be through the implementation of freshwater farm packs.
But we did-
Just su-
We did fund catchment groups.
The... Sorry, Ryan, what was-
T- To your point though, we did fund catchment groups.
Yes, that's right. Uh, but it... That might not have been-
(laughs) And actually-
... true with the Ministry for Environment.
Oh.
Was that true, um, Ministry of Primary Industries- Multiple agencies, yeah.
Multiple agencies, yeah. So I suppose that's where perhaps there could be some
confusion as to where that funding's-
Correct.
... all coming from because it's across multiple agencies.
That's right.
Yeah.
It was under Jobs for Nature a multi-agency approach.
One of the key questions considered is should we have a single
agency to fund catchment groups or a single way
of being able to draw that information together so that there is a single
source of truth.
Mm-hmm. But then recently there was a, um, a national body of catchment
groups that was established.
Yes, so they- they have been-
And they were obviously, uh, given some funding to, uh,
facilitate the catchment groups across the country was my understanding.
Actually, o- one-off funding provided and there's further work underway
that Anne refers to about, uh, from Budget '26 onwards.
What does the, what does the forward funding look?
We do have a multi-year contract with, uh, the New Zealand Landcare Trust who
provide, um, facilitation and coordination around catchment groups as
well. So that, that remains an ongoing commitment at this stage.
Um, but that's also time-limited.
Okay. No, that's good to understand, uh, that there obviously is still funding
there available.
S- And I had another supple- Alana might be more-
Lan.
Yes.
Sorry.
Yeah.
Just supplementary just while we're on the execs thing.
So to help us understand the gap
as you call it, so
Jobs for Nature was $1.2 billion and supported over
10,000 jobs. And you note in your report it
created enduring benefits for biodiversity, freshwater, and
regional economies. And you talk about its legacy
continuing through strengthened community capability and ongoing
partnerships. What is the funding that has been
provided? A- Accepting that it might be across different
sources, do you have a ballpark figure on what
that amount of funding is
for catchment groups?
Not at this point. Um, just to refer back to James's
comment, uh, the forward solution
for funding catchment groups is under active consideration and thinking
about what that model might look like, taking into account the group that was
referred to earlier, um, a catchment collective group.
So the design specifically for funding catchment groups is under
active consideration.
But wasn't there a specific funding amount in the previous
budget?
Mm-hmm. There was.
Do you know what that was?
I don't think so-
I
can't remember. But I don't think we've got that off the top of our heads.
But-
Okay.
But yes, there was... There was funding provided for, uh, uh, the current financial
year.
I think Budget 2025 committed 36 million over four years for the
catchment groups. Okay.
Yeah, the- the three EPIs.
Three EPIs. So not three... That which was exactly what
we were talking about. So we're kind of like talking about like a one point-
Yes, that's that, that's-
Um-
That's the $9 million a year.
Mm-hmm.
Between 1.2 billion Jobs for Nature and about 34
million, did you say?
Yeah, in a COVID rundown-
But that wasn't specifically Jobs for Nature.
Um, the, the catchment groups.
The 1.2 billion covered all of Jobs for Nature, that
covered-
Mm-hmm. Yeah, that's right.
... a whole range of-
Absolutely.
... (overlapping dialogue) But I'm trying to get the magnitude of the gap that we've
just been told exists and is very clear (overlapping dialogue) I've got to make a
difference. Um, should we move on to another supplementary from Grant?
(overlapping dialogue) Yeah, yeah, but I'm at-
Rachel has
a supplement. If you want to, please. If, if you're good on this. Yeah, okay.
Because mine's quite... Yeah. Well, mine's more general.
It's like (laughs) more general stuff.
But w- we're talking about biodiversity on private land.
That, that was, um, the Chair's question.
And we had another item that we haven't discussed yet, uh, which was
managing risks from ETS-driven exotic forestry, particularly permanent
forestry.
Mm-hmm.
And I just want to ask if you've done...
if the Ministry's done much thinking about, um-...
ways to incentivize, um,
indigenous, uh, forestry in,
in terms of the ETS and where that's at and how those two different-
Yeah, Sam might want to provide, um, some, some more detail on this.
...
But, um, certainly there has been a, um, further work done on,
uh, updating, uh, the lookup tables, uh, for, um,
indigenous, uh-
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
... afforestation under Emissions Trading Scheme.
Um, and it's work that we do with the MPI around procuring the science to
support that. So that is a, that's an ongoing, uh, uh,
process. Um, there's been further policy work done around the removals
framework for, um, Emissions Trading Scheme in, under the Climate Change
Response Act. So, uh, for removals that might either
be, uh, assured for voluntary, uh,
purposes or under the ETS itself. And so
looking at the ability for the Climate Change Response Act to support
a wider range of activities that, uh, that might be, um,
eligible for
removals. So like Australia.
So, so for example, wetlands being, uh, able to be accounted
for, uh, for, um, either for voluntary
carbon or for, uh, ETS units. So there's a, so there, there's been
policy work done on that.
Right.
There are some legislative, uh, changes that will need to come through, uh,
CCRA Amendment Bill, uh, to be, uh, yet introduced to the
house. So yes, it has been a long area, area of work.
So you are doing
that, thinking. Anything else, Sam, you want to add on that?
No, we, I think we provided the committee with...
I think you asked for our, our views on the issue
of, um, forestry within the ETS.
And we provided some thoughts there on the wider issue, not so much specifically
on natives. I, I, I don't think
there's any specific work at the
moment, um, looking at... We haven't been s-
you know, advice that's been sought around, you know, playing with the
ETS framework to, uh,
incentivize somehow, uh, natives, um, over and
above the extent to which you get rewarded for them at the
moment.
Okay.
Those are choices that governments could take down the line if, if they wanted
to. There is interest in, you know, taking advantage of Crown land
and, um, opportunities to plant native trees on,
on Crown land and that's sort of a work in progress.
Just native trees? And, and is Crown land there, is that
all conservation land?
Uh, so, uh, so there are a range of
constraints on Crown land. Um, so we've provided advice on, uh, opportunities for
afforestation across both, um, uh, native and, and exotic.
Right.
Um, uh, there's yet to be announcements on, uh, that.
So that's something that's been under active consideration by, uh, ministers.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and we've, um, we have identified that there is constraints that
exist in terms of, um, the purpose for which land is held.
Oh, definitely.
Yeah.
Understood.
And Grant?
Yeah, I'm sorry. Um, going back to the catchment groups, if that's all right.
Mm-hmm.
New- probably New Zealand's some l-... It's okay. I didn't realize.
I thought Julian was-
Jumping around a little
New Zealand's largest, probably largest funded catchment group, if want to put it
that way, is Kaipara Mine and Remediation.
I'd be curious to know what's, what's your, what's your feedback?
How it's progressing? I'd love to...
You know, as a Northland MP, it's quite a big part of my patch.
(sighs) It has a major impact. How's that?
Obviously, um, you'll be aware, uh, that they have, uh, recently
gone through a change in leadership with, um, Justine, uh, moving
on. So that, uh, will be quite significant for them.
And I know she's had a significant impact in the success of the
program. Uh, but by and large, uh, they are all on track, uh,
and we will continue to fund, uh, them into the future.
Yeah. And, and, and in terms of the outcomes, are we seeing some measurable
outcomes yet?
Yes. And, and what specifically? 'Cause it's obviously the main challenge, as I
understand, is around the sediment control and so forth, working with
local landowners in particular.
Yes, yes. Uh, pro- uh, I could probably come back
to you-
Yeah.
... with some more detail on this one.
But just noting that progress with sedimentation does, uh-
Take
a while. ... normally take some time, uh, to demonstrate.
But if that, uh, um, chair is comfortable with this-
Yes.
... this was-
Finding more, finding some further information, that would be great.
Yeah.
This was a case study in one of our recent reports, so we can send that-
That would be great. Thank you, yeah.
... to that effect to you. Can I just build, in terms of the, the role of catchment
groups, I just wanted to connect it back to our conversations about data and the
role-
Yeah. ... of the Minister for the Environment.
So we've got some work underway to develop a, a tiered data
framework that can ensure that there can be standards in place to ensure
confidence in place-based data that's collected so it can be
used, um, to inform decision-making where appropriate.
So ensuring that the checks and balances are in place, but also recognizing that,
uh, data that's informing, uh, catchment scale decisions-
Yeah.
... uh, is different than data that, that comes in at a national level.
So we're working through a, a, a tiered framework.
We're just at the early stages of that.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, that of course links back to the conversation about other place-based data
sources. So ensuring that-
Yeah, and does-
And actually I, I was just thinking on that data because does that mean that it's
easier to track information across multiple agencies?
Because often that can be the challenge, right?
Is that the, as you say, the, the funding and the work is happening across
multiple agencies within government.
And so does that data help with, with that and the tracking
performance?
So one of the critical challenges that we have with environmental information,
which you would have heard from the Parliamentary Commissioner-
Yeah, we do.
Mm-hmm. ... a number of times, is the interoperability between data sets.
They-
Mm-hmm.
So the ability to tell a... to pull together a picture because
often the data is, uh, collected with different methodologies and
approaches. And so that's why that our role in producing data standards and
ensuring that methodologies can be consistent is so critical to ensure that
there's better data and more data available in the system to inform
decision-making at all levels.
Yep.
And j- just in terms of data, one of the feedbacks I get from, from
catchment groups is that they often have to...
in terms of monitoring and measuring outcomes, they find that
they, that the regional councils-...
ha- ha- do limited work in that space, versus the, the data they
require is much more detailed and they do, some of them do it themselves
to, 'cause they wanna be able to demonstrate what's happen- actually happening.
Um, and is there work going on in that space to try and actually deliver a
model that's gonna give us more accurate and more information?
So, so that's exactly the basis of the, the tiered data framework-
Yeah.
... that I mentioned.
So recognizing that data quality needs to reflect the
decision, the level of decision-making-
Yeah.
... and having the checks and balances in place.
Because often, at present, citizen science, whether it's created-
Yeah.
... through catchment groups or other forms, is not recognized, uh-
... through into some, some data channels.
We've, through environmental reporting, done a lot of work, uh, with sustainable
coastlines with the-
Oh, great. Yeah.
... the marine litter, and so that data can be-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, brought up and, and utilized at a national level, but it does require the
methods and the standards-
Yeah.
... to be in place so-
... we can have confidence in the data, but recognize the flexibility that's
required.
Mm-hmm.
Because the data to inform a catchment level decision-
... is different than, than if you were looking at a, at a national level decision.
And so the, the data points that might be available-
Yeah.
... uh, at a catchment level differ than, than what's regionally.
So that's the point of that work.
And just, and one other final question, 'cause the firs- one of the, I get given
examples where they, um, the local original council might be measuring water
quality at a lower level of the catchment, yet if you go right back to the
start of the catchment, sometimes that, the, the challenge can actually be
starting there. The data, like for example, whether it's measuring a,
a, a particular data point-
Mm-hmm.
... it actually might be worse at the start because of naturally occurring
phenomena in the, in the water quality.
And, and 'cause, and that's one of the things that really frustrates them because,
and they feel they're up against it.
So, is that gonna be part of making sure we get that accurate full
picture of a, of, of a catchment, not just the bottom end?
Mm-hmm. That's like, this is obviously a complex and multi-year, uh-
Yeah.
... piece of work.
Uh, and recognizing, uh, that we need to have a monitoring
network for the country that-
Mm-hmm.
... that reflects, uh, different decision-making levels but
also reflects a robust regime that we can rely on.
Yeah.
Uh, and so this does require investment.
It requires investment over time, uh, to ensure that, that some of those
fundamental challenges can be addressed.
Uh, you can read any one of our environment reports, uh, that have a
summary of, of, uh, our perspective in terms of the data gaps and the challenges
that exist. We're, we're absolutely, uh, working hard to address
what we can, and we see that as fundamental to our role-
Yeah.
... sitting here, uh, to ensure that as lead advisors actually ensuring that
there can be confidence in data and that data can be accessible.
There's, there's no point in data just being there if it's not accessed as well.
So fundamental to our job-
Mm-hmm. ... and our role ahead.
Thank you. Appreciate it.
I think that leads us on quite well into our next section-
Yeah.
... on the agenda, which is information and research and obviously looking at
data as well, and addressing science, uh, research and
data needs and how research funding is prioritized and
safeguarded. So, uh, we'll start with Rachel who has some questions
around this.
Yes. Well, you, you already, um, did the intro for it, Natasha-
Mm-hmm.
... with reference to the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment, who's
obviously been very active in this area with letter writing to ministers and-
Mm-hmm.
... various different reports and coming to the select committee as well.
(clears throat)
Um, and we know we've got these big,
uh, resource management reforms again, but also the science reforms as
well. So, and James, you might have something specific
to say about this with your, your personal involvement
too. Um,
but if you could start a conversation on this
by, um, commenting on, uh, how it
is that you're using data for, for the RMA
reforms and how, um, that
interacts with the science reforms and, and whether the public
financed science is, um,
providing the information that we need
to do good resource management, or if it's not, and where those gaps
are.
Who wants to start?
Well, I might just make a sort of general comment, and, and Natasha can give
a, um, more detailed answer specifically in relation to, to
gaps. Um, but look, uh,
as Natasha said, we have consistently said that, um, that there
is, uh, uh, an essential investment required by
the nation to support-
Sure.
... good decision-making and science data and evidence.
Um, we have continued to prioritize that through our
organizational change, both in terms of our direct
procurement of, uh, of science, which is relatively modest
(microphone crackles) but more importantly, in our, our participation
in the science system more broadly around articulating the priorities from
a, uh, environmental management point of view, working with MBIE
through the science funding, uh, review-
Mm-hmm.
... and the science policy changes, and also working with the science, um, provider
community around, uh, what we consider to be the, the priorities and the
essential data sets and the essential, uh, procurement that, that,
others need to be investing in to ensure that the system has, uh, what it needs,
including, uh, regional councils.
So we remain very active in that space and we do have, have a team
that, that, that interface with the science policy
system. I would say that, um, it, you can
always invest more to, uh, uh, have better
decision-making. And, uh, certainly from our
perspective for the work that we do, more investment would be advantageous
for New Zealand overall. Um, but obviously those that have to make
final allocations have got a whole range of trade-offs around other priorities, et
cetera. So just recognizing that. So, um, could we do more?
Yes. Um, uh, have, have we, have we got an ideal
evidential base to support decision-making in the environmental management system?
I would say no. I would just say that, um, uh,
regional councils provide......
the backbone of the national state of environment monitoring.
That is a requirement of them, so as consideration is given
to the future functions of local government, um, we have certainly advised
ministers on the importance of that work continuing.
Um, there are different ways that that could be delivered in the future, but it
certainly remains an essential part of the environmental management system.
So, I'll just build on that point, and Nadine, if you want to, um, build on the,
uh, the, the new planning system. Just connecting to the
science performance work and, and-
Mm-hmm.
... James' comments here. Um, we have been very actively
engaged, uh, in that work. And, and actually having the two
reforms running alongside, uh, uh, is
beneficial in, in some ways to be able to draw connections between the changes that
can be made. We realize the importance of being clear
about priorities.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and so, you would've seen from us, uh, we published, uh, recently
an interim evidence priorities report, which back to our discussion about
environmental reporting, was informed by our own evidence base-
Yeah.
... and other sources of a- of information.
So, being as clear as we can about where we think investment priorities for
science, uh, need to lie, uh, recognizing that
we-
(clears throat)
... we can never fund everything, but we can be deliberate about the things that
are funded and what that looks like over time.
So, through our change process, uh, we managed to hold onto a, an
$11.5 million investment, uh, in Science and Data as an
organization. We managed to hold onto our principal science
cohort, uh, who provide critical science expertise into,
uh, all of our programs across the organization, and our science community more
broadly. So, that's been a fundamental part of, uh, what we've deliberately worked
through the change process. In working with MBIE, uh, they obviously
hold different levers than us, uh, and so, uh, we will
continue that work closely with them.
Um, if you think about, uh, the controls around nationally significant
databases-
Mm-hmm.
This is a, an MBIE, uh, example. I just refer us back to the, the
Landcover database that we were talking to earlier.
So, so this is a fundamental dataset to understand, uh,
how, uh, land is used, uh, in this country and, and the controls around it.
We fund that between the Ministry for the Environment, Ministry of Primary
Industries, and Department of Conservation on a five-yearly basis.
We just, you know, do what we can. Uh, it would be good to see that some of
these critical datasets could be recognized as, as n- nationally significant.
And that's some of the work that we're doing, uh, to, uh, provide our perspective
into the science reforms.
I think-
Oh, you can go another (1:30:47) but if you want to keep going (1:30:48) Nadine.
Well, I think just building upon what James has said earlier, and Tash, just
connecting the dots back into the policy space-
Yeah.
... as James said at the beginning, the, the issues in terms of good data
have been with us for quite a while.
Yes, we did. (laughs)
So, work progressed under previous reforms, work progressed under
subsequent national direction, national policy across freshwater,
biodiversity, natural hazards. All the issues that you've been talking about today
have been well-known, known. And as Tash has been speaking to, the work
has been underway, both to source the appropriate information to set the data
standards, but also to work collaboratively with councils and other
research providers. Where it comes back into the policy
space, is that what the sort of the single...
So, just coming back to that question of, is this sufficient data?
One of the critical things is through the policy, is to be able to
standardize and to ensure that there is a, I guess, an
agreed suite of critical data that underpins
decision-making in, in both the existing system, but also
into the new system. Um, and you do that through being really clear in
legislation what's required, and we've talked about the Flood Map as being one
really critical layer. Um, so that's where the policy process comes
in. So, in terms of the comment of, or the question as
to, do we have sufficient? I think we have a
lot, if we can utilize what is already in existence
at council level, across the research sector, and also
from the Ministry of Environment.
So, part of what we're doing at the moment is making sure that that can be
utilized, um, and that we can then continue to build on from
that, as opposed to, um, necessarily doubling
up. So, so that's really the work that we're doing, and will continue to
do.
Mm-hmm.
So, so I've heard a few different things in those answers, and it was a long
question, and it was one to open up for discussion.
So, um, that's by way of criticism.
But, um, so what I've taken from that, is that, yes, you have
been, um, working-
(coughs)
... on the science reforms and advocating for
environmental research. Uh, you've managed to
retain, despite the change management process, the $11.5 million
and, um, your principal science cohort.
Uh, but also, you've also told us that the role of councils is
critically important for those datasets, and that, um, the role of
standardization across that is, is very important as well.
And that's work that you'll continue to work on when coming into new
reform work. Um, but do you then...
So, do you... And I, I take the points that you've all made about that
there's only ever so much money for, um, science and research,
but are you... Do you agree with the Parliamentary
Commissioner for the Environment's concern that this environmental research
isn't, or is easily deprioritized or is not
prioritized, and the relationship that the having a
good, um, knowledge of our environment has to our wider
economy? Is, is that a-
So, uh, we, we haven't seen any evidence of
deprioritization. Um, there are, uh, and this is starting to
stray a bit, obviously, from, um, our responsibilities.
Mm-hmm.
But the, the, the government's Science Investment Plan, uh, will
be, um, announced in the not-too-distant future, uh-
Yeah.
... and there are overall allocations needing to, to be, to be made.
Um, so we haven't seen a, a sort of an overall
deprioritization of environmental science over time.
We've seen the science system be fund-constrained, uh, and that
is-... broadly in line with the funding constraints across government
generally. So, um, yeah, I, I, I, I think it would be
inaccurate to suggest that environmental science is being
disinvested in. Uh, it's just not being, uh, invested
in, uh, a lot more than present. And
I think we've given you a number of examples today where there has been continued
investment. We continue to make investment as well, but the overall quantums of
investment probably broadly flat, I would say, across, uh, the
system, uh, in environmental science.
Noting that we're always building.
Every year we spend, we discover more and we
add to the existing databases, et cetera.
Right. I think there might be... Um, I'm not...
Won't get into the debate with you about the prioritization, but
that, that's your opinion.
Thank you. Um, what about the relationship to the
economy and how, how our environment underpins
so much of our economy? Do you do much thinking about that when, when
considering-
Yeah. Yeah.
... the science that you prioritize?
Yeah, absolutely. Um, and our environmental reporting
program has us look at pressure, state, and impact.
And so, impact can, includes, uh, human health impacts as
we were before, but also economic impacts and, and other things.
So that's absolutely part of, um, our responsibility to provide
full and balanced, uh, advice as we, as we can, as best we
can. Um, just, uh, building on, on the points and
perhaps thinking about the opportunity in a digital first
system, so in modernizing the system.
And, and your point around regional councils, often, um, one of the
challenges at present is access to data.
Mm-hmm.
And so it may, it may be present, uh, at a regional council, but it may
not be able to be accessed or drawn in-
Accessed or drawn into.
... by other sources. So that's the, the opportunity in digitizing and then
standardizing to enable that digitization. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, I've got a couple further questions on this, so we'll go to
Cameron Luxton.
I'll ask primary.
Oh, okay. Yeah, Ryan's got a, um, supplementary question.
Oh, thanks.
This one is primary.
Oh yeah, this is primary, yep.
Yeah, just probably just trying to dig a little bit deeper into what I was getting
at later in terms of that data and the cohesion and, you know.
Um, can you speak more about the, the progress you've made through this review
period and what that pipeline looks like in terms of, uh,
providing... It's not going to be a one-stop shop, or is it?
Um, you know, like for insurance, for banks, for, for councils.
Mm-hmm.
Where's all this information landing?
Is it still disparate or are you guys taking a lead role in collating
it?
Uh, we're absolutely taking a lead role, and you will be hearing more about
this, uh, with the announcements next week.
Uh, but just, uh, to, um, to reinforce and connect
back to the advice you've heard previously from the Parliamentary Commissioner for
the Environment, and, uh, letters around the, the need for a
federated model. That's absolutely, uh, the approach that we're taking so that you
can make the most of different data sources, uh, but
have the standards in place to ensure that it can be brought up and
used, uh, for a range of different decision-making
opportunities. And, and that will enable a level of innovation that's not possible
when that data can't be accessed.
Right. Yeah, because that was part of the challenge too, was, um, not comparing
apples with oranges across the country in terms of data sets.
So, so that standardization is an ongoing piece of work
now?
It, it is. It refers to what I was saying before about to ensure that
standardization, part of that is setting the policy and the
legislative requirements to use a set of standard information.
And that then drives whether the information is being developed by
whoever, third parties, for a particular purpose, it's been
developed in a way that can then be utilized more broadly.
Right.
Thank you. Look, we will take another, uh, primary, uh, on this subject,
and then we might need to move on-
Yeah, that's
fine. ... to the next area.
Thank you. I just wanted to pick up on the kind of cross-agency
collaboration challenge within the information
research. And noting that Minister Jones canceled the
Oceans Secretariat. So my understanding was that
was the vehicle that was coordinating some of the oceans policy
development. Is there now no coordination between
DOC, yourselves, and fisheries, or how, how is that
working?
So there's on... We... So the ministry retains a, uh, marine
policy function, and we obviously have, um, specific, uh, policy
functions, uh, within the coastal marine area under the Resource Management
Act, and that will carry through into the new, uh, uh,
the new resource management system.
And then within the exclusive economic zone for managing environmental
effects. So we retain a policy capability there, and we continue to
work with colleagues in the Department of Conservation and in the Ministry for
Primary Industries on ongoing policy development in marine space.
So the removal of the secretariat hasn't necessarily impacted
that work? Or was it playing a key role?
What's-
The, uh-
... the status of that?
The genesis of, of the secretariat was, uh, a vision
of a, of a increasingly integrated approach to the
management of our, um, our marine environments.
Um, it's well known that it's a heavily fragmented, uh,
landscape with many agencies and lots of different
bits of legislation that operate in the marine space.
Um, uh, there is no current government plan
to review all of that and integrate that in any way.
So we're just continuing to modernize our bits of legislation that are part of
that, as do, uh, our colleagues in other agencies.
Thank you. And then on a similar vein, has there
been any progress in this proposed creation of the
Ministry for Environment, Transport, and
Housing?
That remains under active consideration, and that's a matter for Public Service
Commission.
Okay, thank you. And do you have a view on the
creation of it and whether environment risks being
deprioritized, being bundled together?
... I'm not going to offer a view on that.
I think that's-
Yeah.
... a question better placed, uh, to the Public Service Commission.
Thank you.
Thank you. We'll, we'll take one last-
Yeah, really
quickly, Chair. ... question on this area from Cameron Luxton.
Uh, the... Just asking, Ministry of Environment's,
um, funding policy for NGOs is, how do you,
uh, fund NGOs? Do you fund NGOs? And what sort of
process do you do to establish contestable funds or otherwise?
Historically, the M- the ministry has, uh, funded, uh, a
range of environmental NGOs for different purposes.
So we've had a community environment fund and a legal assistance fund, uh,
historically. Um, uh, both of those, uh, funds came to an
end, uh, in the, uh, '23/'24 year. So in the
'24/'25 year, uh, under review today,
uh, we have, uh, not funded,
uh, uh, any environmental NGOs, uh, per se,
except if you might consider, for example,
um, uh, the New Zealand Landcare Trust or the
Toimata Foundation that funds New Zealand Enviroschools program.
Mm-hmm.
Um, there's a probably a, a, a different view of what constitutes an
environment NGO. Um, but if we're talking about New Zealand Forest and Bird
or the Environment Defense Society, uh, uh, or Fish
and Game, um, we have not funded the '24/'25 year, I
think, uh, those agencies. I know there was a-
That was my question. Has that happened this...
This financial year?
...
financial year?
Um- Hey, Leon. Uh, are contracts that are being made now (overlapping dialogue)
Uh-
... previous budget decisions-
Did you wanna maybe come up to the, uh-
So, so I, look, I, I, I've got the information in front of me, so, so I can say in
the '24/'25 year, um, the Environmental Defense
Society had, uh, some residual contract funding provided to it, and
that was for specific work, uh, in the resource management system.
And, uh, so they were funded to do policy research.
They weren't funded to do, um, uh, uh, advocacy as
such. Um, the other funding that has gone to, uh,
entities that might be described as NGOs, Environment Hubs
Aotearoa or Para Kore Marae Incorporated, which is a waste
reduction, um, organization, those were, were for particular
services in the community, particularly around waste reduction, uh, et
cetera. So, I don't think, I don't think they would fit the normal definition of
a, um, of a environmental NGO. They are a non-governmental
organization, but, um, neither of those are necessarily in the
business of, um, uh, national policy advocacy.
Sure. I appreciate you... I did ask about NGOs, not environment NGOs, but I
appreciate the fulsome answer. So just to be clear, the policy as it
stands right now is, uh, not to be funding, um, lobbying or
litigating NGOs, environmental or otherwise-
Correct.
... and only provide for,
Best interests.
... NGOs doing specific projects?
So, there, there, there's not an explicit policy to that effect.
The funding that we had available for, um, community
investment or legal assistance no longer exists.
Okay.
There was a bit of a tail end around, um, uh, funding
in, in these, uh, specific cases. Uh, but we have no
funding going forward available for those sorts of organizations.
And if, and if the, uh, the organizations that you currently do fund were to take
litigation up against Crown or one of its agencies, that would impact on future
funding?
Uh, not necessarily. I think that would be on a case-by-case basis.
I mean, I don't think, um, uh, the, the ministry,
uh, uh, would fund litigation against the
Crown. Um, but if there is an organization that is
undertaking, uh, litigation, um, we might still
fund them. If I give you an example, contemporaneously, um, there is,
uh, litigation with respect to Ngāi Tahu on freshwater against the Crown, for
example. Um, we may still fund Ngāi Tahu for, uh,
transitioning their treaty settlements under the resource management reforms, for
example. So we wouldn't preclude funding Ngāi Tahu for a
specific purpose just because they are in litigation with the Crown.
Um, but that would very much be c- considered on a case-by-case basis.
Is-
Yeah, take another one.
Is the treaty process a result from RMA
changes? Uh, and it, it...
So you say on one hand, we're funding, um,
to go through the RMA changes and on the other hand, there is a, a court case
happening. I suppose we can't talk about it too much, (whistles) in sub-judice or
however you... But how is that not
connected?
Uh, so look, I, I certainly wouldn't, um, comment on the matters before the court,
uh, and the merits or otherwise of, of the, the litigation.
Um, but what I, what I can say quite definitively is
that, um, uh, most, uh, treaty
settlements have direct reference to the Resource Management Act.
There are, in some cases, specific, uh, RMA
mechanisms or requirements arising from those treaty settlements.
And it will be necessary as part of, uh, these
next, uh, reforms due to come to the house, as it was with the previous
government's reforms, to, uh, amend settlement arrangements to
reflect, uh, the changing legislative landscape in which they're
operating.
Thank you. Look, I think we're gonna move on to, uh, our next topic
on the agenda, um, which I'm sure everyone's very interested in, um,
given it, it's a lot of your workload, uh, at the moment.
Uh, the fast track approvals process and, uh, of course,
uh, greatly anticipated RMA reforms.
Um, so members, if we would like to, maybe we do it in
two parts. Um, we potentially could do the fast track
first, um, then we'll move on to the actual RMA
reforms. So, um, Lan, we'll start with you.
Thank you, Chair. So, um,
we've been advised that MfE has five staff
advising the minister on-... essentially assessing fast
track projects, whether they're at the substantial or referral
stage, and then helping her form her
comments. How many instances has the
minister actually commented on these fast track projects, whether they're
at the referral or the substantive sha-
stages?
Yeah, um, I might refer to Anne on this one.
I, I've, um, uh, we- we've got a team that's supporting
ministers collectively, including Mr.
Bishop, who, uh, has the most substantive
role, uh, in fast track application, uh, uh,
approvals. Um, I know that that was an answer that was
provided, uh, previously. Um,
uh, it seems counterintuitive to me that, and I'm being very candid here in
front of the committee, that we've got five full-time
FTEs just supporting Minister Simmons as part of that
process. I suspect it's a calculation more broadly, uh, of
staff involved in, uh, uh, ministerial
decision-making. So, Anne, could you clarify that?
I, I, I mean, I'm happy to be wrong
on that. I, I think, just to clarify, I think it was 60%
of the time of five FTEs
dedicated to advising the Minister for the Environment is the information
that we've been provided for.
We'd have to check that.
Yeah.
It does sound funny.
Can, can we come back to the committee on that?
I know that w- that was an answer that was provided previously, um, and I'm just
not, um, uh, certain that we've got that right.
So, we will come back and confirm that to the committee.
Okay, thank you. So, the work that is
done, is that all cost
recoverable from the applicant?
No.
The work of MFE is not cost recoverable?
Not always-
In that instance?
There's a wide range of activities that fall outside the cost recoverable
(coughing drowns out speaker) .
For example, processing of OIS.
Okay, thank you. And then, from my
understanding, the m- the environment minister is commenting on
essentially very few, uh... She's using
her ability to comment on very few instances.
And when she is, the comment is, "I have no
comment." Do you think... Are you finding in sort of
assessing MFE's role in this that that is
essentially a bit of a waste of
time?
So, the mechanism in the legislation was to enable the minister, uh, should they
wish to, uh, to make comment. And not just the Minister for the
Environment, but, uh, relevant ministers.
And that, in any given case, can be a significant, uh,
number of, of ministers. For example, if there was a fast track application for a
new hospital, uh, the Minister of Health would be invited to comment.
Um, I think what we've seen from ministers generally is that,
um, uh, they are putting their, uh, faith
in the, uh, expert panels to undertake the assessment of effects.
And that's where, uh, all the evidence around effects are weighed and conditions
are set. Uh, and so, um, uh, the Minister for the Environment,
uh, is presumably, uh, considering that it's not necessary
to make any additional comment, uh, on top of that process.
Mm-hmm. From what we have seen with the amount of ministers that
are commenting versus the environment minister, they actually
are using the opportunity, particularly in instances where
they're supporting the projects.
Um, do you think there is a
gap or a risk that the minister not
using her legislative ability to comment on this pro- these
projects, that there are environmental gaps being missed?
Uh, no. And the reason I say no is that the act
requires an assessment of environmental effects, uh, to be undertaken.
And so, um, that is part and parcel.
If you use the hospital example, uh, it may
not... It, it's not necessarily a statutory requirement that,
uh, the benefits of a new hospital, uh,
would be... The economic benefits would typically be included, but the,
the benefits of, of a new hospital may not be articulated in the application and
it's not necessarily a, a requirement of a panel to consider
the public health benefits of having a new hospital, for example.
So, um, I would expect that ministers would provide, um, uh,
additional comment, uh, that are wider than the core
considerations of the panel. And the core considerations of the panel are on those
environmental effects, and they are required to weigh those.
So, I don't consider that it's creating a gap.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Rachel.
Yeah, on a similar theme, uh,
of course, the Fast Track
Approvals Act has in section 3, its purpose is
to facilitate
the projects full stop. There's nothing about sustainable development there.
And you've just talked about the weighing up of environmental considerations by the
panels. Uh, that has a lesser weight
than the purpose of the act. Um,
and you said the minister hasn't chosen to be involved
because presumably you're looking at the assessments that the
panels are doing on those environmental matters and deciding that
they are, um, fulsome or robust. And you're nodding,
so I'm taking that as a
Well, that's a, that's a, uh, a process step that the EPA undertakes, which
is that, that completeness assessment of the information
required. And then ultimately the panel will determine whether or not,
um, the information is adequate. That's not-
Sure.
That's not the ministry's role.
No. Okay, so can you explain the ministry's role in relation to the
minister and at what level you're making that assessment
and what comfort you're looking for?
So, if, if, if we thought that the Minister for the Environment, uh,
had information that the panel was not otherwise going to
receive that she should make available, then we would recommend that she
makes that information available.
And, and so when, when in the process do you do that?
Uh, so when she's invited to comment....
by, um, uh, by the, uh-
By the panel.
... uh, by the minister-
By the minister.
... uh, typically in the referral stage.
Right. Okay. And
with-
But actually, yeah, in both steps.
In both steps, right.
Yes.
Yeah. So, with the changes to the Fast Track
Act, with the amendment, uh, where there will
be, uh, a reduced opportunity to
comment from other parties, do you anticipate that the
minister
might make more comment?
Uh-
If other parties don't have the opportunity to-
Well, look, I couldn't, couldn't give you a view on that.
That's, that is hypothetical, and I think-
Mm-hmm.
... um, uh, we would need to see whether there is a gap that
arises. Um, I
go back to my previous answer, which is that the panels will still be
required to receive, uh, a- an, an adequate
assessment of environmental effects and condition the activities on the basis of
that.
And does the ministry have, uh, enough
capacity to properly, properly
assess those environmental effects and
assessments?
Again, it's not the ministry's role to make those assessments.
Mm-hmm.
It's the panel's role.
No, but for the minister to be able to work out whether or not the minister
should be commenting.
Um, well, I think, I think we've got resource allocated to provide her with
advice. Um, the adequacy of that would be dependent on any given
particular application and circumstance.
Thank you.
Thank you. Look, we'll go to Ryan, and then we'll move on to RMA reform.
Oh, thanks. Look, it's just in response to, uh, Lan Farm's question on cost
recovery. And you, I just wanted to check, are you aware that with the Fast Track
Amendment Bill, Clause 53 amends Section 108, which
enables regulations to be made about fees, charges, and contributions, that they
may be covered from applicants by an agency, the EPA, or the minister?
So, we are trying to tidy that up and some of that, so I just wanted to put that,
um, in response.
Thank you, Ryan.
Yes, so we are, uh, trying to increase the level of overall
recovery just to make sure that, that it's clear what can be
recovered. Um, I th- I think there will always be, uh,
aspects of administering the regime that aren't attributable to an individual
application, um, uh, or for which we're fulfilling, uh, a
public purpose, so responding to an Official Information Act request.
So, the reality is that, um, the, the Crown will not recover,
uh, every last dollar associated with Fast Track, and we were funded, um,
through, uh, previous budgets to, uh, run the
Fast Track, uh, regime. So, um, the ministry is, is funded to do
so. Um, but certainly the policy intent has been to recover as much
as possible from applicants, and, and that is currently how, um, we're
approaching it.
Thank you. Um, look, now we'll move on to RMA
reform, uh, for members. And I'll start with Rachel, because I'm
sure you have, uh, many questions, Rachel, on this particular
area.
Well, yes, I mean, in noting that, uh, before
members of government say that, or you say that, um,
this, obviously we haven't seen the bills yet and that is to come.
So, I, I know that, but I want to ask questions about the work
that the ministry's been doing in the lead-up to these
bills. And you mentioned earlier, uh, that the
ministry has been working on this for five years now.
And so, can you comment on how much of the
work that went into the Spatial Planning Act and the Natural and Built Environment
Act is being used in the current
reforms?
Go.
We'll
do. Difficult to, to be, to quantify in very precise terms, but yeah.
Yeah, I mean, I think, I think it's probably difficult to quantify in precise
terms, but, but essentially the, the intention,
um, in the, the foundational work for spatial planning, including
things like, well, what is the purpose of, of spatial planning, looking across
the country to have a really good understanding about what currently works, what,
what doesn't work. Um, the, the 30-year, um,
horizon about looking to the future, ensuring, doing the work
around what are the critical data sets that underpin good
decision-making at that spatial planning level.
A lot of the information around how do you bring together both
the, the sort of, the infrastructure and information that the Crown may have
available, in terms of, uh, you know, education, or
hospitals, or infrastructure. So, all of that work has essentially been able to
be brought forward and used as part of the spatial
planning, um, work. There's broad support for spatial
planning, and that's been really, really useful.
I think that's built up over a number of years as, uh,
different stakeholders and different groups have really, um, discussed,
um, why, well, the value of it, and where it sits as part of a,
I guess, a future planning system.
So, would it have been more efficient to amend those acts rather than
repealing them and starting again?
The acts are broader than, than the spatial planning elements.
So, I think one thing from the ministry's perspective
is, uh, there's a number of lessons to be learned over s-
subsequent years in terms of how the, the legislation
comes together. So, spatial planning is one key element.
Another really key element is around
h- uh, how does, say, the national directions or the
sort of, the, the policy set by central government through
ministers, how does that flow down through the, the
system? So, I, I think I'd, I'd, I'd probably make the comment
that every time the ministry has, uh, um, I
guess, put its effort towards providing good advice around what is an
effective resource management system for New Zealand, there's still more
lessons to be learned. But there's a lot that has been carried through, including
more broadly than, than the spatial planning, so a lot of the lessons around
national direction as well.
Yes, I was thinking more broadly. Yeah.
Yeah. I, look, I'd just add that I think the Natural Built Environments Act
was, uh, closer to the RMA-... station
will be, um, both in, in, in structure and in
content. So, um, yes, I think,
uh, it will be such a significant departure from the
RMA that fresh legislation, uh,
will be seen to have been appropriate.
Which the Natural and Built Environment Act was.
Uh, how much, uh, resource has gone into this second
round of reforming the
RMA?
Uh, a considerable body of, of, of resource.
Um, uh, I, I don't know whether I've got the costed information.
We might need to provide it to the committee.
It's 92 million.
Yeah, 92 over four-
Yeah.
... but in the last financial year,
um,
yeah, can we come back to you with-
Yeah.
I- is the, is the question in relation to the whole program or the last financial
year?
Uh, the whole program. Yeah, the whole-
I mean, you can just give me the last financial year.
If that's easier, then that's fine.
Yeah, so as indeed we're saying, so 92 million allocated in Budget '25
over a four-year program, um, but that, uh, that is still subject to the
Program Business Case of Budget '26 for implementation.
So that was f- that was for, um, the policy and national,
uh, uh, national direction development so,
um, there is a, there is a larger scale of investment still largely-
Well, and a lot of that w- would have been happening under either, either
regime, either the MBEA or the new
legislation.
Th- that is correct. But as the member might recall, uh, there was other funding
that had been earmarked for implementation-
Yes.
... of previous government reforms, $301 million.
I mean, it
That was returned, uh, to the center in, uh, Budget '24.
Yeah. Yeah, no, aware of that. Uh, now the Prime Minister said
recently, um, something like, "If we can get th- the
RMA done, um, it's a big thing that no other government has dared
to do." I'm wondering if MfE has ever advised the Prime Minister
that, in fact, the Resource Management Act was repealed and replaced with the
Spatial Planning Act and the Natural and Built Environments Act?
Uh, we have not provided that specific, uh, advice.
Um, uh, al- although I would, um, reiterate the
comment I made before, which is that the new legislation is
much more distinct from the RMA than the MBEA was from the
RMA.
Mm-hmm. But it has many parts of the MBEA-
But there-
... come across?
But there are parts that are coming across, yes.
So, yeah. Thank you.
But just to clarify though, though, that it will be a significant
reform because, uh, it is distinctly different
from the current RMA, which is what you're saying, right?
Correct.
(laughs)
Well, I suppose that come across-
It would, um, my, my-
Just moving on-
... supplement... No, come on. Are you as then saying that the MBEA
and the SPA were not significantly different from the RMA?
I was saying, uh, what I, I, I... And I absolutely stand by this comment,
is that the MBEA, uh, is more similar
to the RMA-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, in its, uh, uh, in its, uh, legal concepts and its,
its, its, its breadth, its overall construction, uh-
Yeah, 'cause some of the wording is the same, so that some of the case law would
come across, or?
Well, it's funny 'cause, uh, (creaking sound) we, we-
So, so the, the legislation... I...
I mean, we're getting ahead of ourselves 'cause it'll obviously come to the
committee-
Yeah.
... uh, next week, and you will debate these matters, I'm sure.
Um-
Mm-hmm.
But, but, but, but certainly as has been publicly noted in the Cabinet paper
earlier this year was, uh, publicly released, the new system,
uh, will be, um, significantly narrowed from the RMA in
terms of management of effects and thresholds associated with it, et cetera.
So, um, it is, uh, it will be quite a departure from,
um, the current system.
Thank you for that clarification. Um, Lan?
Just
Yes?
Uh, just on the implementation phase, like we're about to see
the bills, but I understand it's gonna be a phased process.
Do you feel that MfE is adequately
resourced to actually undertake the implementation phases?
So, we're not resourced to, uh, uh, implement the
reforms, uh, at this point, and that is what is subject to the Program Business
Case.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Look, we're gonna move on now from Fast Track and RMA reform
to, uh, our next item on the agenda, which is waste
minimization and the waste levy-
(coughs) ... and the role of councils and how the funds are currently being
used. Um, so I will open it up to
Kahurangi.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair. Great to see some of my former
colleagues here today. Um, the Ministry for the
Environment's continued their work through '24, '25 to modernize the Waste
Minimization Act 2028 and the Litter Act
1979. Can
the Ministry clarify whether it's still on track to deliver the new
fit-for-purpose waste legislation within the current parliamentary
term? And what risks or delays have emerged that may
affect the timing or scope of the reform?
Uh, the, uh, uh, the
substantive policy decisions have been taken by, uh, uh, by
Cabinet. Um, the, uh, the current
constraints on whether or not, uh, those reforms will be enacted this term
are twofold. First of which is, um, the Parliamentary
Counsel, um, uh, Office having, um,
uh, the full bandwidth to support the process to take it through,
um, uh, legislation, and most operatively, House time.
So, at the moment, the government's giving consideration to the House program
for 2026 and the priorities of bills.
Mm-hmm.
Um, uh, it will be, uh, in the mix. Um, but those
are choices that, uh, ministers will yet to, need to take
in terms of its priority relative to other bills.
Thank you. Uh, so last week, I was in Raglan at Xtreme Zero Waste,
the first resource recovery center in the world, something Kiwis can
all be very proud of. So, what specific policy work is currently
underway to improve resource recovery?
And how is the Ministry prioritizing these
initiatives?... have a go at that, Simon?
Uh, yeah, I can start. Su- just to say, uh, the, uh, those
policy decisions on the WMA should be in the public domain before Christmas.
Okay, great. Thank you.
Um,
so, uh, where do I start? There's a range
of, um, initiatives that have been progressed over recent
periods that relate to resource recovery and improving the recycling system.
So, the- this kerbside standardisation program probably is
a, a key thing that was introduced at the beginning of the term and which has been
progressed to try and reduce contamination, as you'll be, uh, well aware
of. So, flowing out of that, there has been
work. Um, uh, it was a bringing together of,
uh, a group, um, uh, now, now
known as the Recycling Leadership Forum, which is sort of a cross-sector group
across the supply chain, trying to bring the
manufacturers and those responsible for running the MRFs and
actually undertaking the collection and reprocessing to come together to try and
solve some of the problems and the challenges we have associated with certain
materials that, at the moment, excluding from the recycling system.
So, things like aerosols, for instance.
So they're working together to try and find some solutions they can, uh, agree
are implementable.
Ooh.
Um, so I mentioned that. I'd mention product stewardship.
It might be a separate topic later on, but I think, um, that continues to
be quite a big and important part of the overall work
program and, um, our, uh, our effort to improve
recovery of resources. So, um, I think we know about
tyres, um, and, and the TyreWise scheme, which has been up and running and I think
had five million tyres collected, uh, uh, just
recently. And yesterday, as well, just
happens that the agricultural plastics, the rural recycling,
product stewardship scheme, the decisions by cabinet to support that were announced
as well. So that's a really good step and it actually addresses two of
the priority products that were declared some years
ago. Um, uh, I would
say, just also worth mentioning, probably the investment that goes into
the Waste Minimisation Fund, which Anne is actually responsible
for. But that, um, has been continuing to progress and support a
range of different projects focusing o- on organic recovery and
reprocessing, uh, at the moment. But that's another of the
government's, um, uh, policy levers, if you like, to
support increased resource recovery and recycling.
I'll probably just, that's a sort of a synopsis.
There's probably a better summary on our website and in the public domain.
But those are some of the things, I think product stewardship's been, um,
yeah, a really particular area of focus, uh, we've
mentioned.
Thank you. Can I have two more questions?
Yes.
Thank you. Uh, so are there any resourcing,
um,
cross-agency or regulatory impact challenges that could push this
legislative timeframe other than the PCA or
Cabinet, um, considerations?
I don't think so.
That's mainly House time.
Yeah, it's House time.
Okay, cool. And just one last one. Given that waste emissions are a
component of
the transition to the low-emission economy, how will the
updated legislation strengthen the waste sector's
contribution to emissions
reductions?
Hmm.
I'm not sure the specific responsibility will sit there.
It'll continue to be the CCRA, which is the main legislative framework for
reducing emissions.
Mm-hmm.
I think that's probably
the case. Um, uh, the- the
WMA will be focused more on, you know, recycling and
recovery and the roles and responsibilities of different parties within the,
um, waste framework. But I think it's actually the CCRA which
continues to drive inference and stats,
where, um, uh, you have responsibilities for emissions reduction plans, which
then take you to how are we dealing with organic waste, which is contributing to
emissions. So I think it's, it's probably fair to say that the
CCRA rather than the WMA is going to re- remain more important
in terms of reducing waste emissions specifically.
Mm-hmm.
Albeit activities that occur as a result of the WMA are
gonna continue to contribute to the extent that they get to organic
waste.
Thank you.
Including the WMF investments.
Thank you. We'll move to Cameron Luxton now for a question.
Um, I've got a question. Uh, how, what's the, uh, what's the
cost? Wh- how much has the cost of per ton gone up for waste
disposal in the last sort of decade, maybe 10 years or...
So, um,
uh, it's been stepped up, the waste disposal levy, I
think, which is one component of the overall cost of taking, um,
the waste to landfill. So is it a more...
Uh, just keep that in mind because, uh, the levy is only one element of the
cost, um, has stepped up from, uh, $10...
Sorry, in relation to Class One landfills-
Mm-hmm.
Sorry, it's a complex landscape of different landfills, which have different
levies. But if we just talk about Class Ones, which are the municipal landfills,
that stepped up over s- several years from $10 a ton
to, it'll be six- it, it went to $65 a ton, uh,
in July this year.
And so, would that cost, how much sort of change in tonnage
have we seen going to landfill?
So we have, uh-
(clears throat)
Obviously, it's difficult to unpick the, uh, uh, variables
influencing overall tonnages and their economic variables and their, uh,
economic incentives based around the cost.
Um, but we have seen... So I don't want to claim a direct link
that I can speak to beyond what we can reasonably observe, but there has been a
reduction in waste volumes over the last few years.
Now, whether that is driven by the waste levy
itself or other economic variables or behavior change
is diff- difficult to allocate and attribute.
Um, so I'm not gonna try to. Um, we are gonna do a bit more
work over the next six months to try and dig into, do a bit of a stock take
around where we've got to with the levy and some of the outcomes we've seen.
That might, might draw some conclusions for us around that, that level of
attribution that we can reasonably make between the levy and volumes.
Okay, 'cause I've got a bit of a question about where, uh, and maybe it flows on
from your answer you've just given.
Where does Cla- like, Class One per capita has been going down.
Yeah.
Where do you think that waste is going?
Uh, so- so
overall pict- so it's- the historic picture is a little
bit difficult because we only collect the class one data up to a few years
ago. So we have a lot of to- we have a time series for class one that goes back a
long way. Um, uh, again,
I'm not going to be able to attribute, uh, the level of certainty that maybe you're
hoping for. Uh, overall waste volumes across
all, um, landfill classes appear to have declined
slightly over the last couple of years.
It's possible that some of, um... there has been some
diversion from, say, class ones to class twos.
And we've only just recently started capturing class two, three, four
data, so it's difficult to actually be conclusive around the
extent to which that- there is an effect there.
But it's possible that there has been dot- some diversion, uh, of
materials from class one to class two.
Whether that's legitimate or driven by evasion, avoidance of the levy is
another question that I wouldn't be able to give you a definitive answer around.
I hope, I hope-
We do monitor. We do monitor this stuff and -
Next annual review-
we've collected
the same. ... or whatever we're calling these things, um, we'll be able to have that more
data, that'd be good.
Yeah.
How long do you think... How much work is going into this right now and how long
till we get that data?
Uh, so there's, there's data be- so there's data being collected all the
time. So the, and that's re-
Analysis of the data, then?
Analysis of the data. So we're gonna do a piece of work over the next six, next
six, next six months to, uh, effectively do a stock
take on where we've got to with the levy and to see if we can draw some
conclusions as to what has been working and effective and where there might be some
lessons to be learned. That's still being scoped at the moment,
um, but it'll be six month process as we want to do it properly.
Cool.
We did introduce new waste data regulations on the first-
Yes.
... came into effect on the 1st of July, 2024.
So, um, uh, obviously that's one full year and
so we'll start being able to do a year on year comparison.
But-
Hmm. Thanks.
Yes.
Thank you. Um, and Priyanka. Uh, thanks.
I just had a quick question on your, um, (clears throat) on the project
that MfE's done on food loss and waste.
Um, and that was a baseline study-
Yep.
... uh,
from what I, from what I read. And I appreciate that it's pretty
new.
Mm-hmm.
But wanting a bit of an update as to, given it's a baseline,
you would assume that this would be ongoing so that you could compare,
um, data
on food loss and food waste and also then,
um, move on to projects that would decrease that.
Yeah.
So just keen for a little bit of an update of where that's potentially gonna
go.
Yeah. So it is new, um, and it is the first
time we've done it this way. And probably fair to say we're still building the
datasets, but it's-
Mm-hmm.
... and it's a reasonable attempt at a first baseline around the amount of, um,
food, uh, loss waste in our system.
Uh, we will draw on that potentially in a
couple of ways. For instance, I mean, it helps us...
it has helped identify where the food is being lost.
So you can see some of it is at the primary production sort of on-farm level,
some is at- some is at the processing level and some-
Yep.
... at the household level. Those are the three main buckets.
Yeah.
So that helps inform where we might focus some of our policy effort or
potentially where we might potentially focus the WM...
the Waste Minimization Fund in terms of opportunities for reducing food
waste. I think early days though as to how-
Mm-hmm. ... it translates into policy or when we might next update.
I don't think we've set a date for a s- you know, an update to the baseline or
to- is to, you know, see whether or not we're tracking down.
Yeah. So is that something that you would provide advice to- to
ministers for decision on next steps?
And do you have a timeframe around that?
No, it's... I think I would consider it information resource at the mo- uh, c-
to help inform further advice to- to ministers around, um, food
waste lost as well as to help us generally track,
um, uh, uh, those trends over
time. So, no, it- it's not something that will necessarily feed
into a- a decision that it's upcoming.
It's a general resource for informant policy.
Thanks. Thank you. And Grant.
Um, yeah, a couple of, um-
Yeah.
... s- questions. Uh, couple of specific questions about,
um, in this, uh, waste area. Um, how important
is, um... in terms of soft plastics, some of, you know...
soft plastics, how important is the, um, uh, FuturePost,
uh, project, um, and business in that- in that area when, in terms of
the amount of plastic they take out of that,
out of segment outside?
Oh, I- I, uh, I can't comment on the relative importance of it.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, but it has been a project that has received funding support.
Uh, with numbers, again, we'll- we can come back to you with-
Yeah.
Okay.
... specific data.
Okay. There'll be -
Yeah, yeah. Okay. And- and the other one is, um, uh, when
you... in terms of the- the waste, uh, picture, do
you... where the... in terms of the Golden Bay Cement with its-
Mm-hmm.
... it takes a lot of, uh, round about 1,000 tons of waste, I think, out of
Auckland. Is that, um... how important is that in- in terms of the
o- overall picture in dealing with, um, the waste from
Auckland as opposed to landfill?
So certainly on tires-
Mm-hmm.
... like, um, uh, it plays quite an
im-
One is-
... important part of the Product Stewardship Framework for
tires.
Mm-hmm.
I did have these numbers, uh, the other day and I
might get them wrong, but I think of all of the tires collected
through the Product Stewardship scheme, potentially s-
60%-
Yeah, 60, yeah.
... is going to Golden Bay-
Mm-hmm.
... as fuel d- uh, you know, as a coal substitute-
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
... um, I think, and then there's a chunk that, um, go to other
processes and some is exported, yeah.
Yeah.
So it's- it's pretty important, uh, particularly to the tires ecosystem.
Yeah. And yeah, and I- and I've- I've seen that- that they do deal with a range of
oth- other waste products as well.
Yeah.
I've seen up there, I think I saw a whole pile of rat tests sitting
under that at one stage.
Hmm.
... left over from the COVID (laughs) that had got disposed of through
that -Rachel.
Oh, okay. So, d- different, different question.
Uh, page 23 of the annual report, uh, refers
to, uh, creating new opportunities in the circular
economy, which I think is a great thing for-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, MEV to be doing. But I'm wondering if you can comment how
this, uh, statement works with the waste strategy that had
all references to the ideological, as the minister calls it,
circular economy being re- removed.
Uh, well certainly, um,
the examples we've been discussing, the, um,
uh, Power- Powerwise was a huge,
uh, project for, uh, '24/'25 year.
And the work we've continued to do on refrigerant gases
and on, uh, farm plastics have all contributed
to an increase in, uh, our circular,
uh, economy. So, um,
the framework, the legislative framework, uh, does continue to give us the ability
to add priority products in over time that help with that.
Okay. Talking of then, the legislative framework, uh, there's been
work underway for, since the last term of government, um, even
maybe the term before that, in terms of updating waste legislation and that was
consulted on in May this year. Can you give us an update on that?
Well, I d- just as, as earlier, um, uh, those, the
Cabinet decisions, um, will be to the concentration process, Cabinet
process, play it out and we can, we should have some, uh,
information and decisions in public domain shortly-
All right, so-
... and before Christmas, yep. So, and then it's a ques-
Oh, before Chri- before
Yep. Hopefully before Christmas should be the Cabinet decisions.
Then of course, um, uh, there's, it's a question of when house
timing and when it gets in the legislative process.
Right. Sorry -
Yeah.
... to get you distracted on that one.
That's all right.
Can you
tell me a bit about, um, I know we were talking about organics
before
and the changes that have been made, um,
to the, the settings about curbside compost.
Um, and I know that, um, Wellington Council said
that they weren't consulted on that decision to scrap the
requirement. Scrap. That's an unint-
(laughs) ... unintended pun there-
(laughs)
... obviously. Um, can you... Do you
think it would've been useful had they been consulted?
Where, where are we at with organics
generally and the uptake of curbside recycling?
Can
So this is decision not to proceed with mandatory-
Mm-hmm.
... curbside food scraps collection?
Yes.
Okay. I, I, I honestly can't remember who was consulted or
not ahead of that decision being made, who was...
So I, I, I couldn't tell you. It's a, it's a wee while ago now that that
decision was taken. Um,
and I think Wellington is one of the few s- major
centers, if not the only major center, that doesn't currently have
a, a curb, a, a, um, food scraps curbside
system, so collection system. So, uh, that's with them.
I mean, I know -
Okay. Have you done any analysis into the, the change in that
requirement,
what, what that's doing to, um, waste levels and...
Uh, we certainly looked at, at and gave advice a-
around the potential sort of impact of
not proceeding with that mandatory requirement.
And, um, like without having the numbers in front of me, there was essentially
a trade-off between the costs associated with, um, those
services that, um, uh, would be borne by, um,
council and ratepayers versus the potential
that, um, you might not achieve further recovery of
organic materials as a result, which has a, implications
both in terms of
how far you could progress reductions in waste and also-
Mm-hmm.
... potentially emissions reductions associated with organic waste.
So, we did give some advice on that.
It's, I'm sure it's probably in the public domain-
Yeah.
... whatever numbers we crunched, but that is essentially the trade-off that
we would've given to minister, uh, to the ministers as far as I know, yeah.
Okay. So can I just add another, uh,
lever that we've utilized to support organic waste has been through the Waste
Minimization Fund. So $30 million is allocated annually for the next
four years for Waste Minimization Fund in the current year.
Uh, its core focus is on infrastructure relating to organic
waste. So-
Thank you.
Okay. Well, related to that then, just one, one further side.
Um, on that, I'm interested in that point-
Mm-hmm. ... in you're saying a- and have gone to visit, uh,
where Auckland's, most of Auckland's organic waste goes into Epora
with the anaerobic digestion. And I see on page
25 of the annual report, there's the talk about the composting at
Hampton Downs. Um, what's MEF's opinion
on the best
method of making organic waste
go into something productive?
Uh, we have great technical expertise within the organization-
Mm-hmm.
... on, uh, waste management and that might be something we would refer back to a
subject-
Mm-hmm.
... expert rather than a-
Okay.
... member of the senior leadership team.
No, that's, no, no, and you do
But we would be happy to provide the committee with, uh, some advice on that.
But are you looking at, are they looking at, um, in, in terms of
thinking about the infrastructure and the spend on the Waste Minimization Fund,
that where it's better to-
... use anaerobic and where it's better to do composting.
And I mean, it will depend on scale and where population is and
those issues.
Definitely.
Yeah. Okay, thank you.
We have seriously engaged and passionate staff in this area-
Yeah, yes, they, they are.
(laughs) ... that follow the science closely.
I just might jump in here 'cause it's relevant to the question that I had, um, with
the waste minimisation, um, fund and the flexibility now and, and
the expansion of, uh, councils being able to obviously use that fund for
other things. And, um, the other day I was out-
Mm-hmm.
... in Hawke's Bay at Nourished For Nil, which is an amazing, um,
place in Hawke's Bay that basically rescues food that ordinarily would go to
landfill and then obviously, um, is able to
distribute that to our community in need.
Um, and so they were able to use the waste minimisation
fund to build a whole lot more, um, storage, shelving,
and enable them to rescue more food so then prevent it
from going to landfill, which is obviously a really good example of,
um, you know-
(coughs)
... how we can minimise waste, um, and use it for a great
social impact, um, and to the benefit of our communities across New
Zealand. Are you tracking some of that, um, you know,
those stories and those, um-
Yes.
... you know, use of, of, of, of the waste minimisation fund
now? And 'cause I mean that I thought that-
Yes.
... just a great example.
So the, the regulations that were, that came into force on the 1st of
July last year do require councils to provide us
with, uh, detailed reporting on what they're spending
that funding on, so we're building up a picture and over the next few years,
uh-
(coughs)
... we'll get a good, uh, sense of where, uh, councils are investing.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and that will inform, uh, central government's investment too, to make sure
it's as complementary as possible. So yes, we have got visibility of that.
And, and so what is that picture looking like at the moment in the early days,
um, you know, if you're, if you're obviously being able to take in some of those
examples and, and see that they are genuinely, you know, good
examples?
A couple of different things. I was just gonna say, I think in addition, um,
Anne's, uh, team do a lot of work on case studies and
providing sort of impact assessments of particular projects.
So, and then more at the overall level in terms of what councils
are doing at least, it, we're, we're still getting all of the information.
I think we've got almost all the data in, first round of data from all of the
councils as to where their share of the waste levy is going.
Mm-hmm.
R- rather than doubting their funding.
And, um, uh, you know, whether that's going on services or infrastructure.
But I, I don't have, like, the overall sort of synopsis and
summary of that outcome across the country for you.
Be- because that, that would be quite good to see.
Like, you've got the social impact and then you've got obviously the economic
impact of that as well, um, so you know, suddenly you've got a waste
minimisation fund that's being used for multiple
purposes.
Absolutely.
Um, in terms of the, you know, obviously rescuing more from the landfill,
uh, you know, obviously having a great-
Yeah. ... environmental impact as well as a social impact as well as an economic
impact. Um, so is that something that you're looking at?
Yes. Yes. And just to give the committee-
Yes, quickly.
... um, some visibility of where we are seeing, uh, the benefits
of the expansion and broader use of the levy, uh, we have
been able to fund, uh, emergency waste-
Mm-hmm.
... in a far more effective way, so almost immediately after a
severe weather event, we are able to support councils now, uh, with waste
cleanup. Uh, we have been able to increase the amount of money that is
allocated to contaminated land. Uh, so previously we had
2.68 million per year, uh, through being able to use
the levy.
Mm-hmm.
We now have $20 million a year allocated for
contaminated sites and vulnerable landfills.
Um, we've been able to increase the amount we have, uh, assigned in the waste
minimisation fund. So, uh, the utility has been
really important. The points that you're raising
I think
go to the overall impact collectively, uh, and
the machinery to be able to do that, if I pull in some of those earlier
comments, uh, in the hearing around having multiple agencies
involved in the work and how do you, uh, roll
up, uh, and have common metrics so we can see the collective
impact across the environment is a system that we are going to need to
build over time. Uh, in the review period, uh,
perhaps one of the very first building blocks of that new system was a new
categorisation in the waste appropriation for the
environmental in- um, investment fund.
Mm-hmm.
And so that is how we are going to, at an accounting level, be able to draw
together all of the different investments right across, uh, government
departments that, uh, the PCE has identified as being
fragmented, we have struggled to tell a collective story in a
way that perhaps social investment, for example, can.
So, we can see the need for the things that you are talking about.
We are building them slowly over time.
Um, there is also, for the committee's benefit, other agencies that have been
funded through the expansion of the waste levy, so, uh,
MPI, uh, with the, uh, Hillside
Country Work, um, DoC has been funded, uh,
even, uh, Stockton Mine, uh, which has an ongoing
cost down on the West Coast. So the broader range of activities that we've
been able to fund through the expansion has been significant.
Uh, and the ability to be able to tell the story of
impact through evaluation will, will be, I think, really important in the years to
come.
Mm-hmm. Oh, brilliant. No, that's really good to hear.
Look, we've got a couple of supplementaries on this.
Yeah.
So we'll go to Rachel.
Just first of all, a supplementary on the Chair's question, uh, the, the Chair's
example about the fresh waste. That would have been something that-
Yeah. ... would have been covered by the waste minimisation fund-
Correct. ... with a narrower scope. And then, um, uh, that's
great that you're looking at all the social...
Mm-hmm.
... um, and other sort of wellbeing approach to this
issue. Commend the Chair for her wanting that approach as
well.Um,
and then you were just talking then about the general, the
environmental in- investment fund.
Is that... So, the, the change in the waste
levy, as you've said, it opened it up to old landfills and things that
are obviously related to waste, but then there's this general category of
environmental benefit or something.
Is the Environmental Investment Fund, is that just for that category,
environmental benefit, that's not related to waste, or is it still for
everything?
It is part... It is within the Waste Minimization
Multi-category Appropriation. The CFO behind us
can probably explain what that means.
Yeah.
But it is a way of, um, providing a
clearer accounting of the various spends that go across a
number of different agencies that we just struggle to draw together, um,
to tell a common story. And it's a way of funding them through the waste levy
because of the expansion.
Okay. So, sorry, I'm not sure if I got the answer, though.
That Environmental Investment Fund-
Mm-hmm.
... and the tracking, that's just for the component of the waste levy
that isn't associated with waste?
No. No, no.
No. That's associated with all of the waste?
It can overlap with waste-
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
... but it can also be for broader-
Yes, uh, very weird.
... environmental, um, producing harm or ???
So, it just, um, can be both.
Mm-hmm.
It's at the discretion, and we're looking at a framework with
Treasury to go through MoE and minister so that we
can guide through the investments that do go through there.
Is, is there any tagging in that financial reporting then
of, um,
investments that are not related to waste so that they come in under that broad
environmental benefit?
I'm not sure about tagging, but is the question behind your question how much of
the appropriation is being attributed to non-waste?
Yeah, and-
So, for the next...
We did a four-year budget this year, um, and
51% of activities are core waste.
Okay,
so- Over that four-year period.
... 49%, eh?
Uh, I think if you-
Oh, that's great, I'd forgotten that.
So, there's 347.5 million,
um, budgeted for over four years to waste, which is over
half of the government's share.
Okay, thank you.
Okay, look, we'll take one last supplementary on this.
Thank you.
Uh, Kahurangi?
Thank you. So, as we've been talking about waste levy used to be
spent just on waste minimization, and that has been broadened
to include things that, um, are not
classed as waste minimization. Uh,
my colleague, Cameron Luxon talked about,
uh, those
reductions to Class One and Class Two landfills.
What we did s-... Even though there has been a reduction expected to that Class One
by 5%, that has significantly
slowed down since the '23, '24
time period, which was a 10% decrease.
So,
what... Was that in line with your forecasts, with the changes to
spending on waste minimization? Because what we've seen, right, is that there
is a slowing down of the decrease in waste
minimization at the same time as spending
ha-... Of the waste levy has been taken away from waste
minimization. So, was that slowing down, was that
5% decrease in Class One
forecasted? Was it, was that around...
Uh, forecasted, um, were you expecting
that?
Gosh, um, I'm gonna just
expand out beyond the last couple of years.
So,
if you look at... The tricky thing is that we've only been tracking Class
Ones for a long period of time.
Yeah.
So, it... We don't actually know what the history is with the Class Twos, Threes,
Fours.
Mm-hmm.
But this picture around Class Ones is certainly that they,
uh, increased a lot during the 2010s, but then, uh, have
plateaued and actually started, um, you know,
plateaued, uh, several years ago, um, you know, give or
take. And have actually, if anything, just tilted downwards.
And I, I tend to not want to get too excited about any one year versus the
year before because things move around a
lot. But I do think that's the general pattern was an increase in the 2010s
and just, just a flattening out, perhaps, we've seen in the last few years, maybe
tilting down slightly. So, um, that...
I feel like that's the overall picture.
Uh, the forecasting
is... Uh, obviously looks back to look
forward. And I think it is fair to say that,
um, we've had to reduce our forecast, our
expectations around waste levy revenue, given some of the
reductions in, um, volumes to landfill that we've seen in
recent years. So, I'm not the modeler, but I, I think the modeling
has actually now taken a, uh, a slightly
different view going forward as to how much levy revenue we're expected
to receive. So, that is something we are gonna have to work through going forward,
make sure that we don't over-allocate. But it could change.
The picture could change. Construction and demolition waste could
increase. Things could... Uh, the levy forecast could move again.
Is... But Class Two landfill, that construction and demolition waste
did increase in the last year.
Yeah, I'm saying the overall picture... Uh, well, maybe. I'm not sure.
The overall picture-
Mm-hmm.
... the last few years has been, um, a reduction in
activity, particularly the last couple of years, in the construction and demolition
waste sectors. They contribute quite a lot to our overall volumes.
So, just by example, if we were to see an increase in activity in the
C&D sectors over the next few years, that might lead us
to have to review overall waste volumes and
associate that with the levy revenues we'd expect to receive from, um,
from the waste from those volumes .
Thank you. Look, we are now going to move on to the next item, uh,
which we actually have already covered, so we will move to the last item on the
agenda-
Oh,
sorry, Chair- No, no, no.
... managing land use?
The-
And land use change?
Managing, um, land use. Oh, yeah. Well, we...
Yeah, we've kind of covered it a little bit in there with the, um, catchment
groups, but we can-
Oh, we can go
to land use? ... cover the land use, yes, which is the next item on the agenda.
So you've got a question?
Yes, I've got a few questions.
Okay, thank you, Chair.
Go for it. Um, so we all know that
our land use is under lots of pressure and that's impacting
freshwater. And I wanted to ask whether you were aware
about MFE's advice to the minister not to
send the letter to regional councils from ministers where they set out
their
government's consenting expectations for farmers?
So just so you're aware, the advice was that there would be
reputational and political risks that should be factored in, and
that MFE's best advice would be to avoid sending the letter.
Were you aware of that advice?
Yes.
Were you involved or provided any advice to the minister in
her advocating to Horizons Regional Council for the
consent of her colleague in a water-diluted
catchment?
Uh,
we, uh, did discuss the Horizons consenting
matter with the, uh, uh, minister.
Not in respect of individual, uh, applicants, but of
the, the collective of, uh, consents that were affected
by the assessment of groundwater in that catchment.
So yes, there were discussions with the minister around that.
And did you provide any advice to her about her interactions
with Horizons Regional Council?
Uh, we certainly encouraged, uh...
Well, we, we provided a- advice about the facts as we understood it,
and we certainly encouraged, um, the minister to engage, uh, with
Horizons Regional Council.
Mm-hmm. And has there been any other instances
that you're aware of where MFE has advised
against ministers influencing individual consent
processes in relation to councils and their roles?
Uh, I don't have any information to hand on whether we have or
haven't. Um, historically, we, we may well have.
In fact, um, in all likelihood, we probably have on previous
occasions.
Okay. Do you mean within this term or in previous terms?
I, I mean over the, the, the full time in which the Minister for the
Environment has had a, a role in the system.
Mm-hmm.
Um, uh, look, it's, uh, it's not uncommon for, uh,
consent holders or members of the public to draw to the Minister for the
Environment's attention issues they're having with individual consenting
matter, matters. And, um, typically, uh, ministers want to be
helpful, uh, and we often provide advice about the, the
roles and responsibilities of councils in those consenting matters and, and what is
the limitations of the minister's intervention powers and how should the
minister, um, approach that.
And in the Horizons case, you're saying you were not aware of the
implication of the minister's colleague's consent being included in
that grouping. Is that what you're saying?
I was not aware that there was a, uh, a colleague,
uh, of the minister involved in that matter.
Okay. Thank you.
I have
a supplementary.
It's
So just to com-
Yeah.
Just to confirm, it's, it's not unusual for you to give advice on individual
consent issues raised by constituents with respect to,
um, in, in, around in, in individual councils.
That's not unusual at all, correct? Thank you.
Um, and it wouldn't be independent to, uh, Horizons
Regional Council, because there could be other councils too, where
obviously there would be advice given around potential
consents?
Correct.
So that could be Hawke's Bay Regional Council as
well?
Yes. Uh, I, I think the member was referring to advice relating to writing to
all regional councils, I think-
Mm-hmm.
... from, from memory. Um, and certainly, uh, ministers were,
uh, were concerned about the fact that there are upcoming reforms
and that, uh, uh, councils may be taking
actions or making decisions that, uh, would need to subsequently be
revisited or, or, or unwound, um, uh, once those reforms are
progressed.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, so ministers were concerned to preserve, I guess,
optionality and to avoid regrets.
Um, we advised that there are constraints of obviously acting within the
current legislation before Parliament has enacted new legislation.
Uh, and ministers had to weigh all of that and made their decisions about how to
calibrate their communication to councils about what comes next and how
they, um, think councils should think about the current circumstance.
And so there were other letters sent to other councils, um, in
regards to, uh, consents in light of the,
um, reform that we're about to see come through?
Correct.
Rachel?
Yeah, d- different question. I'm just looking at, um,
the question that we've got in the agenda, which is how can catchment
groups support non-regulatory and regulatory outcomes?
And I think we spoke about non-regulatory earlier on, but I'm just...
I get a bit worried when I see, um, catchment
groups perhaps having a regulatory role.
And I've spoken to many catchment groups about this and people, um,
there don't want a regulatory role because they see their power is in the
community building and the, uh,
you know, the passion for an area and that they're not the regulator.
And, Ian, before you mentioned, um, the role of farm plans as
well. So how, how are you viewing
catchment groups in farm plans? And who does the
regulating, particularly when we have these announcements about regional
councillors potentially disappearing?
Uh, so the regulations, uh, for farm
plans have been under review for some time.
Uh, and there will be, um, a, a update to those regulations in the
new year. And we've been working with ministers on those.
Um, the existing regulations make reference to, um, catchment
context and, uh, the catchment context can include the
collective action of landowners within the catchment....
working on particular matters. So, um, uh, it
has been the position of, uh, uh, previous
government, and I expect will carry for- forward into the,
uh, the new regulations, that it is important for a f- farmer
undertaking a, uh, freshwater farm plan to,
uh, have reference to activity happening in the broader catchment and the
pressures and issues of the broader catchment.
So, um, uh, the steps that are taken on-farm can
contribute to a collective catchment, uh, uh-
Sure.
... effort. And so, um, as was alluded to
earlier, the intention is that our, um, individual farm
planning is supportive of and contributes to collective effort
and vice versa. And so, that they are informed by both.
They may sit within an overall limits framework, for example,
for a catchment where there is a water quality, uh, target that is,
uh, set, uh, in a plan. And, um,
both farm plans as well as catchment collective
efforts will contribute to achieving that.
Okay, so I can understand how you want the farm plan and the
work of the catchment group to be talking to each other and interacting, but then
the question is, if the farm plan is reliant on the catchment
group doing something and that doesn't happen,
how do you regulate for that? Does it just comes back on the farm plan, then
not w- w-
failing because the catchment group does- doesn't do something?
Or is there a way to, um, make sure the catchment group does
what they would say they would do?
Well, so it's an iterat- iterative process, and I think it's important to see that
a, that a farm plan is not a, uh, a, a regulatory
tool like a resource consent that can be subject to, uh, prosecution,
for example, for, um, uh, uh, for
non-performance, and that's not something that we would want to see with
how a farm plan is treated. Farm plan, uh, should be something
that is constantly, uh, informing the management of the property
and is iterative. So, if in the catchment a catchment
collective decides not to undertake, for example, the construction of
a, of a new wetland, uh, for example, um, and
therefore the burden might fall back on a downstream landowner to
undertake, you know, more activity, we would just expect that that be an
ongoing iterative discussion about the content of the farm plan and whether
there's more done on one property or whether the burden is shared by multiple
properties. So, we'd see that as a iterative and, and, and, and circular
conversation between those, those two instruments, if you like.
Right. 'Cause these two... Um,
the RMA amendments that were passed in August-
Yeah,
and- ... provided the architecture for some improvements to the
regime, uh, including,
uh, changing the circumstances in which a, a
freshwater farm plan would be certified and whether it-
Mm-hmm.
... needed to be audited.
Yes.
So those are the, probably the two points at which whether or not it's working or
not, there'd be intervention?
Y- No, no. And, and I understand that.
Um, but is this bigger point then that James also made
that, well, the farm plans aren't the consents and you still
require the consents? And I think
a lot of people had seen the farm plans as a way to,
to achieve or to, you know, take away from the need for
consents.
So maybe you can just expand on that-
Yeah, so-
... about how they all relate, the consents and the farm plan.
So it's the, the outcomes and the action on the farm that matters
and, uh, uh, the thinking around that is that rather
than having a, uh, a rigid, hard tool
with a set of conditions such as a resource consent, the farm plan
is used as something which is more enabling, uh, and
doesn't have that same set of, uh, expectations and
consequences associated with it.
It is a way of enlisting the hearts and minds of
the, of the landowners and, uh, and giving them guidance about
how they manage their, their farm property, um, uh,
without wanting to get ahead of where the committee may be going over the next six
months with legislation it's going to need to, uh, consider.
Um, the question will be, you know, uh, uh, is there in some
circumstances the need to also have a resource cons- a, a land use
consent for a farming activity? And those are matters that, uh,
you know, have yet to be determined.
Okay, thank you.
Thank you. Look, uh, we are nearly at time, so, and I
am conscious that we have got, uh, one area that we wanted to
canvas, uh, with you around product stewardship, um,
both, uh, from the agriculture sector, um, and some of the other schemes that
you've mentioned there with Tiewise, um, which we've kind of covered a little bit
as well, but I think members are keen to, to ask some questions around this and get
some updates from you on some of those programs.
So, um, I'll start with Hone Harawira.
Oh, thank you so much. Uh-
Can the ministry update the committee on the current status of the container return
scheme work program, including what progress has been made in
24/25 and whether the revised timeline has been agreed
to?
Sam?
Uh, so
the way, uh, the government or the min- and the ministry have been approaching it
is that, uh, first thing is the current sort of
framework within the Waste Minimization Act that provides
the product stewardship, um, uh, regimes, is not
actually well set up to accommodate a container
return scheme. So, uh, and that's advice we've
provided to, um, the minister-
Successive governments.
Yeah, successive governments. So, look, so the first
step is actually to have the legislation, um,
progressed. As we talked about that earlier on.
Um, and then you've got a framework within
which it would be a, a, you know, a government would be
able to, if they chose to, stand up a container return
scheme, um, uh, uh, in such a way of
confidence it's gonna operate effectively.
So it's sort of two-stage.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I think the, the way that you probably should think about it is le- primary
legislation first-... then, um, you would actually
then need a subsequent cabinet decision by this government or a future
government to say, "Right, we are now deciding that we want to progress with
a container return scheme. We're gonna use the levers that exist in
the revised Waste Minimization Act to set that up."
So, so there's... If you, if you, if you look at it that way, then that's where the
minister said, "I'm gonna progress this legislation first." That
enables choices for a future government as whether or not they want to
stand up a scheme or not. But there's been no definitive decision taken to
proceed with a container return s- scheme.
Thank you. And so, um, the container return scheme was in the
minister's work plan. Um, so what engagement has the
ministry had with councils, recyclers-
Mm-hmm.
... beverage producers during their '24/'25 period, and what feedback
has been received?
Gosh, we've had quite a lot of engagement on this topic-
... over a lot... a number of years.
Mm-hmm.
And that, that was under the previous government. There was a lot of engagement.
The engagement this term has been
either, one, focused primarily on the, again, the, the
proposed changes to the WMA and, and the
EPR framework that sits within the Extended Producer
Responsibility Framework, which is another way of talking about product
stewardship. What we're proposing to do there has
been... which, as I said, is the key to then being able to stand up
a-
Mm-hmm.
... container return scheme down the track, has been what the set and
the stakeholders have engaged on. So they've had a very...
They've had lots of views around what we need to do with the EPR
framework in the legislation to make sure
it's fit for purpose. So there's been quite a lot in that formal consultation, as
well as, um, you know, various, um, parties
engaging with us or directly with ministers, other politicians around the
views on a container return scheme. I think I'd put it this way.
There's been sort of strategic advocacy happening-
Mm-hmm.
... at all levels, and then there's been more technical engagement with the
ministry about the proposed changes to the WMA.
Yeah, 'cause Kiwis want the container return scheme.
I think it was like 76% of New Zealanders really want it, 'cause we're
concerned about plastics and other things ending up
littered and in landfill when it can be reused.
So, has the ministry actually updated its assessment of the environmental
and economic impacts of implementing a
container return scheme versus not proceeding?
Not since... Uh, I don't think since we provided the
last government with advice around the container return scheme have
we done anything that-
Sure.
... specific and that detailed. We've been focused on setting up the framework-
Right.
... waiting for, um, any further advice to be sought on,
um, on the merit-
Mm-hmm.
... to standing up a container return scheme.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um-
Yeah.
Look, I might jump in and just ask a question around your agricultural
product stewardship schemes, 'cause I know there's been-
Oh.
... a bit of focus and some, uh, investment, uh, and
resourcing towards, uh, looking at how we can
obviously create more of a circular economy within the agriculture
sector-
Oh, I
was hoping there was then, Jack. (laughs)
And given that there's a lot of, uh, you know, waste in that sector.
Um, yeah, do you want to just tell us about, you know, what, what work you've got
going in that space?
To Luke Anderson.
So yeah, a significant milestone yesterday.
Um, the minister announcing that cabinet's made a decision to
proceed with standing up the, um, uh,
product stewardship scheme for, uh, uh, agricultural
plastics. Um, uh, what will be called, I think, the Rural
Recycling Scheme-
Mm-hmm.
... is what it was referred to. I, I think, just to acknowledge, it actually builds
on some really good work that, um, our two voluntary schemes
have-
Mm-hmm.
... um, undertaken over a number of years.
So, AgRecovery and PlasPak have done a really good job, um, and
they have worked together and with a lot of the se- stakeholders to come up
with a scheme that they think, uh, will be successful and
well supported. But it did need, um, uh, some mandate as well
from the government to make sure everyone participates, who's s- in the system
participates-
Yeah. ... and so that's part of what, um, uh, government
has, uh, needed, uh, been required to do. So, significant milestone.
Uh, it will, um, building on what those two organizations have already
done, uh, improve the network if you like, and make sure
that, um, access to recycling services in the rural
sector is more evenly distributed around the country.
Okay, so, um, we've just got a supplementary on that from Cameron Luxton.
Oh, thank you.
Eagle questions
The question... Uh, the answer about how the government needs to come in and-
Information.
... and create a scheme that then, you know, provides a cost that we can allocate
to a container and recover later seems complicated.
If we were to have a waste energy system, where you actually have value-
Mm-hmm.
... in that waste. Would that not provide an incentive to collect that stuff up off
a farm or municipal and then send it to somewhere that might even
buy that waste to use for energy conversions?
Uh, look, I haven't even looked at what the economics of that and whether or not
that would stand up. You'd have to get a business case looked at as
to whether or not it would be financially viable to
collect from those distributed locations.
And there would be, um, sufficient economics in the business case for the
investment in the plant. Look, that's... It's quite a hypothetical.
Sorry, if you'd said-
So it's quite difficult to answer.
If you had... Uh, if you're looking at setting up a scheme and using government,
um, funding to, to subsidize it in a, in a
collection method, um, what's the difference between doing that and subsidizing it
to go to waste energy plant?
Well, the outcomes is different.
Yes. That's true, isn't it?
One is energy and one will be recycled or recovered
material. So I think that's-
Okay.
... that's a... it's a key difference.
Thank
Depending on, you know, like energy source could be, could be helpful. But I,
Look, you're getting into... I- it's quite a hypothetical question-
Oh, no, I was just following on the
Mm-hmm.
... afternoon conversation we were having.
Thank you. Look-
Yeah.
We'll take one last question on this subject, uh, from Lam.
Sorry, it's a different subject.
Oh, okay, so you wanna ask a general question?
Yeah.
Okay, well, we've got two last general questions-
And one
minute. ... um, um, from Rachel too, so we'll start with you, Laan.
Okay. Thank-
One minute.
Oh, sorry, is yours like a wrap-up one?
Mm-hmm.
No, mine's just a quick one.
Oh, you go, you go.
Just a little one. Granny Flats, the NEES on Granny Flats,
where, where can I find that? Where is- what's- what's- where's that at?
It's on the schedule for Cadet Hall, um-
Oh.
... by the end of the year.
Okay, so it hasn't happened yet. Thank you.
Okay, and Laan, final question.
I'd just love to join with the committee in congratulating you, James,
on your role.
Mm-hmm.
And very sad that you're moving
positions. Um, firstly, just looking for
assurance in your decision. Was it in any way influenced
by the government's program in the environmental space or minister's
pressure?
Uh, I can give you categoric assurance it was not.
Excellent.
Uh, it is very much related to the exciting opportunity of, uh, Earth Science
New Z- New Zealand. Um, I think we've talked a lot today about the
importance of science and data and evidence to underpin decision-making, and I
just see an opportunity to take my learning from this role and my previous roles
into, uh, developing the evid- evidence base for, uh, New Zealand's future
decision-making, and I'm super excited by that.
Fantastic. And what shape do you feel MfE is in, particularly
post-February when you move on? What are the arrangements you've got on, and any
closing comments?
Um, look, I'm enormously proud of the organization.
We've navigated a lot of change, a lot of change in work, uh, and- and in
resourcing, um, but I think, uh, the annual report for 24/25 and
where we're at today speaks for itself.
Uh, an incredibly capable organization, uh, and an incredibly
capable senior leadership team. They will just continue to support this committee
in its work and the government in its work in this area, um, in the year ahead.
Great place, Commissioner.
Well, thank you so
Thank you very much. And, uh, we'll echo that too, James.
Um, congratulations to you for all the work you've done and, um, to your team as
well for, uh, yeah, all your efficiencies and, um, the big work
program that you have. So, uh, we really appreciate the- the
insights today and analysis, uh, a long session, good four
hours. We, uh, got a lot out of the session so we do really appreciate your
time and thank you very much.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you.
Thanks all. Thanks, everyone.
(side conversation)
And, uh, we will now break.
Uh-